---
title: Why Nuclear Energy?
description: Become familiar with the best reasons to adopt nuclear energy.
date: 2025-03-02
published: false
---

# Why Nuclear Energy?

## Incremental Optimization

Energy is the key to thriving. As living beings, we have built-in systems for converting food into energy. While we can optimize that conversion by adjusting our diet, breathing fresh air, and exercising our muscles, there is a limit to how much energy our bodies can use.

To do more than merely survive, we need to use additional energy sources in clever ways. For example, we might use a lens to focus sunlight (radiation energy) onto a dry leaf to start a fire. We add some wood and use this exothermic reaction called fire to boil water. Boiling water cooks our food and kills germs. When we eat the food, not only do we avoid getting sick, our bodies extract more energy than if we had eaten the food raw.

That is what we mean by thriving.

Given the limits of our bodies, there is a corresponding limit to the amount of physical labor we can do. To do more, we need machines that are driven by energy. For example, a water wheel uses potential energy that comes from gravity. Water flow down, pushing the wheel around, which turns a shaft that is connected to a grinding stone. The rotating stone grinds wheat into flour, which is a key ingredient in bread. Again, we found an improvement in terms of acquiring useful calories.

Then we improved on the water wheel. We dammed rivers and introduced water turbines that generate electricity. Electricity is portable energy, given a bit of high-gauge wire. From gravity to electrons that power our toasters that make our bread even tastier.

In a relative blink on the galactic timeline, humans have devised many ways to convert natural energy to productive uses. Of course, we also found plenty of destructive uses. That said, this essay focuses on what we want more of, energy that helps humanity thrive.

## Practical Energy Sources

Some sources of energy are practical. We have experience using them. Every energy source has tradeoffs that should be considered in any comparison. Burning wood releases smoke and soot into the air. Damming rivers destroys an existing ecosystem, but introduces a new one.

These lessons set aside hypothetical scenarios, like the potential for fire to burn down your neighborhood. "What if" scenarios tend to introduce fear-based thinking. "What if an asteroid hits the earth?" Rather than being distracted imagining metaphorical tigers in the jungle of the mind, stay calm and keep a dispassionate mindset about fundamentals.

Once you have mastered the fundamentals, you may not be interested in catching your hair on fire just for fun.

### Burning Things (Combustion)

Fire is one of the most obvious sources of energy. A supply of oxygen and a spark are all it takes to set fuel ablaze, releasing energy in the form of heat and light.

The common byproducts of burning things are carbon dioxide (CO<sup>2</sup>) and water (H<sub>2</sub>O). The main drawback of burning things is air pollution: gases like carbon monoxide (CO) and sulfur dioxide (SO<sup>2</sup>), soot that is full of things that are bad for our lungs.

Of course, lots of things can burn. We have already mentioned wood. Fossil fuels are a rich source of energy, which is why they are so popular. Coal and oil are loaded with pollutants. On the other hand, natural gas (methane) burns cleanly, producing only water and carbon dioxide.

Another clean burner is hydrogen. Just like methane, hydrogen and oxygen combine to release water vapor, CO<sup>2</sup>, heat and light.

By the way, CO<sup>2</sup> is not a pollutant. Plants are happy to turn CO<sup>2</sup> into food, like French fries. You don't need to "clean up all of this CO<sup>2</sup> lying around the beach."

How about biomass? That's a fancy way to say "things that once were living." Plants, animal carcasses, even algae. Same smokey output.

### Harvesting Environmental Energy

We have many ways to gather energy from what is happening in our environment. Some places have lots of wind. Some get lots of sunlight. Where there are rivers, we can harness the flowing water. Waves carry energy, as do the tides. In some places, cracks in the ground expose heat from the earth's core.

:FigureFrame{:src='/images/courses/limits-of-nature/imaginary-geyser-in-Greece.jpg' :bg='light' caption='Geysers are nature blowing off steam.' :width='400px' credit='My dog' creditUrl='https://www.mydog.com' bg='dark'}

### Splitting Atoms (Fission)

## Theoretical Energy Sources

Some sources of energy are theoretical. They are based on our ideas of how things work, but we have not yet figured out a reliable way to put these ideas to work.

While there is nothing wrong with seeking new and better ways of converting energy, they cannot be put to practical use.

### Combining Atoms (Fusion)

Mimicing the sun seems like the most efficient way to release energy. While experiments have proven that this is possible, it is not yet practical. Until we can create a sustained fusion reaction that we can control, fusion remains on the list of theoretical energy sources.

### Quantum Energy

### Chi - Energy of the Soul

If we are part of a simulation, chi may be the only true energy source. It powers the imagination. Perhaps this is all a dream.

## Why Nuclear Energy Is Better

Given all of the options we have for extracting energy, what makes nuclear the best energy source? The rest of this course is dedicated to answering that question.

:AtomicDivider

Need a break? Take a breather, grab a beverage, and come on back.
